docs(proposal): Simplify Concurrency Model (#2435)
sustainable-computing-io/kepler: docs/developer/proposal/draft-20260302-simplify-concurrency-model.md

has led to several concurrency bugs, each fixed by either adding more
synchronization or removing the concurrency that caused the bug.

This proposal documents the current concurrency design, the
synchronization it requires, the bugs it has caused, and proposes
a simplified alternative.

## Background

### What the Collection Path Does

Each collection cycle performs these steps:

1. Read CPU energy counters from sysfs
2. Read GPU power/energy via NVML (local library call)
3. Scan `/proc` for processes, read cgroup/environ per process
4. Aggregate processes into containers, VMs, and pods
5. Compute node CPU usage ratio
6. Calculate power attribution (arithmetic, no I/O)
7. Store snapshot

Most steps are local I/O or computation. The one exception is pod
resolution: when a container ID is not found in cache,
`kubeletPodInformer.LookupByContainerID()` triggers an HTTP request
to the kubelet API (`/pods`) within the collection path.

### Design Intent: Scrape-Time Freshness

The concurrency model serves a deliberate purpose: **data freshness at
scrape time** (Architecture Principle #4). Prometheus scrapes at its own

> schedule (e.g., every 15-30s), which may not align with Kepler's

Reviewer: ```suggestion
schedule (e.g. the [default](https://prometheus.io/docs/prometheus/latest/configuration/configuration/#duration) `scrape_interval` is `1m`), which may not align with Kepler's
```

Prometheus scraping every 5s, collection interval 5s, staleness 500ms.*

This means the periodic timer's collection is almost always wasted —
by the time the next scrape arrives, the timer's data is already
stale. The node performs the same collection **twice per interval**:
once from the timer (unused) and once from the scrape (served).

The entire concurrency machinery — singleflight, recursive
goroutines, atomic snapshot, WaitGroup — exists to safely handle
two paths racing to do the same collection, when in practice one
path (scrape-triggered) dominates. The timer's primary role is
ensuring data exists when no one is scraping (e.g., for the stdout
exporter or at startup).

### Scrape Latency Is Coupled to Collection Duration

When a scrape arrives and data is stale, `ensureFreshData()` runs the
full collection synchronously in the scrape handler's goroutine:

```text
scrape handler (net/http goroutine)
  → PowerCollector.Collect()
    → monitor.Snapshot()
      → ensureFreshData()
        → synchronizedPowerRefresh()
          → singleflight.Do("compute", ...)
            → refreshSnapshot()          ← blocks here for full collection
```

> The scrape handler blocks for the entire collection duration.

Reviewer: The default scrape timeout is 10s. Next paragraph mentions that:

> On a production node with thousands of processes,
collection can take hundreds of milliseconds

This is an order of magnitude margin, therefore timeout is not a risk

concurrency design choice that created the problem.

| Commit     | PR    | Fix                                                            | Caused by                                                                                      |
|------------|-------|----------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| `b43260a9` | —     | Removed goroutines that mutated maps concurrently              | Fan-out goroutines writing to shared maps without synchronization                              |
| `99a271ec` | #2146 | Added context check after `select` in `scheduleNextCollection` | Recursive goroutine scheduling — `select` on timer + context can pick timer after cancellation |
| `c5a2be5e` | —     | Replaced `RWMutex` with `atomic.Pointer` for snapshot access   | Lock contention between collection goroutine and scrape handler reading snapshots              |
| `7c0ee313` | #2386 | Added synchronization to test cleanup                          | Recursive collection goroutine outlived test — no lifecycle tracking                           |

> | `a64511b4` | —     | Moved mock cleanup to safe point                               | Background collection goroutine read mock expectations during `t.Cleanup`                      |

Reviewer: +1 I could not find a64511b4  👀

where three goroutines write to structurally related state. The
current code operates on disjoint fields, but this is a fragile
invariant.

## Goals

- Document the concurrency design and the synchronization it requires
- Present the bug history as evidence of complexity cost
- Establish whether the concurrency is justified for local I/O workloads
- Inform a follow-up proposal if simplification is warranted

## Non-Goals

- Propose a specific refactoring (deferred to follow-up EP)
- Change the service lifecycle model (`oklog/run.Group` is appropriate)
- Remove concurrency from HTTP server or pod informers (legitimate needs)
- Optimize collection performance

## Proposed Alternative

### Collection Model

Replace the recursive goroutine scheduler with a simple ticker loop
and make all collection sequential:

```go
func (pm *PowerMonitor) Run(ctx context.Context) error {
    // Initial collection
    pm.collect()

    ticker := time.NewTicker(pm.interval)
    defer ticker.Stop()

    for {
        select {
        case <-ctx.Done():
            return nil
        case <-ticker.C:
            pm.collect()
        }
    }
}

> ```

Reviewer: We use the ticker loop pattern in another project that I maintain, cloudcost-exporter. For example, take a look here: https://github.com/grafana/cloudcost-exporter/blob/main/pkg/google/vpc/vpc.go#L93

```
	go func() {
		ticker := time.NewTicker(PriceRefreshInterval)
		defer ticker.Stop()

		for {
			select {
			case <-ctx.Done():
				logger.Info("VPC pricing refresh cancelled")
				return
			case <-ticker.C:
				logger.Info("Refreshing VPC pricing data")
				if err := pricingMap.Refresh(ctx); err != nil {
					logger.Error("Failed to refresh VPC pricing data", "error", err)
				}
			}
		}
	}()
```

+1 for this approach!

Within `collect()`, all steps run sequentially:

```text
collect()
  → resource.Refresh()
      → refreshProcesses()        sequential
      → refreshContainers()       sequential
      → refreshVMs()              sequential
      → refreshPods()             sequential
      → refreshNode()             sequential
  → readEnergy()
  → calculatePower()
  → storeSnapshot()
```

Per-process type detection (`computeTypeInfoFromProc`) also becomes
sequential — call `containerInfoFromProc` and `vmInfoFromProc`
directly instead of spawning 2 goroutines per process.

### Scrape-Time Freshness

The scrape handler calls `collect()` directly when data is stale,
guarded by a `sync.Mutex` to prevent overlap with the ticker:

```go
func (pm *PowerMonitor) Snapshot() (*Snapshot, error) {

>     if !pm.isFresh() {

Reviewer: The outer `isFresh()` reads the snapshot timestamp via the atomic pointer, which should be safe without the mutex - @vimalk78 could you confirm this please?
